[RFC] Trust Store for TLS and SSH (#3366)
fluxcd/flux2: rfcs/0000-trust-store-for-tls-and-ssh/README.md

Before this RFC, the officially supported approach leans on secrets to pass this
information to the controllers. The same secret is also use to provide user
credentials, which is more sensitive in nature, making this sub-optimal from a
security stand-point.

### Goals

- Consolidate the officially supported trust settings across the Flux ecosystem.
- Formalize support for configuring trust at controller-level.
- Add toggle to block object-level trust overrides.
- Enable users to surface trust information securely.

### Non-Goals

- Maintain backwards compatibility with older versions of Flux.

## Proposal

For configuring system-wide trust, Flux would rely on the well-established OS-level
trust store. When dynamically mounting of the trust store is required, it will be
enabled by using Kubernetes `Secret` and `ConfigMap` mounting. When immutable trust
store is required, users can build their own version of the controllers, with their
baked-in settings.

TLS and SSH use different techniques to establish the identity of remote servers,
each relying on its own trust store.

The sections below will dive into the specifics of each one, highlighting their

> details, changes required and example of the propose use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
details, changes required and example of the proposed usage.
```

```yaml
  - patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/volumeMounts
        value:
          - name: ssh-trust-store
            mountPath: /etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts
            subPath: known_hosts
            readOnly: true
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/volumes
        value:
          - name: ssh-trust-store
            configMap:
              name: flux-trust-store
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: "(kustomize|image-automation|source|image-reflector|helm|notification)-controller"
```

#### Object-level Known Hosts Expansion

A new field is to be introduced into the existing kinds `ImageUpdateAutomation` and
`GitRepository`, to allow users to expand on the controller-level known hosts for
SSH operations:
```
spec:
  trustStore:
    ssh:
        secretRef:
        configMapRef:
```

The trust store can be expanded by either setting `spec.trustStore.ssh.secretRef` or
`spec.trustStore.ssh.configMapRef`, not both. Either option should contain the data
under a `known_hosts` key.

Known hosts configured this way will be aggregated with the ones defined at both
system and controller levels.

#### TLS

> In SSH, the remote server identity is based on [public key infrastructure] and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In TLS, the remote server identity is based on [public key infrastructure] and the
```

```

Patch required on the main `kustomization.yaml`:
```yaml
  - patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/volumeMounts
        value:
          - name: tls-trust-store
            mountPath: /etc/ssl/certs/ca-cert-flux.pem
            subPath: customCA.pem
            readOnly: true
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/volumes
        value:
          - name: tls-trust-store
            secret:
              secretName: flux-trust-store
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: "(kustomize|image-automation|source|image-reflector|helm|notification)-controller"
```

#### Object-level Trusted Certificates Expansion

A new field is to be introduced into the existing kinds `Bucket`, `GitRepository`,
`HelmRepository`, `OCIRepository`, `ImageUpdateAutomation`, `Provider` and
`ImageRepository`, to allow users to expand on the controller-level known hosts for

> SSH operations:

Reviewer 2: Is this about SSH/know hosts or TLS?

Author: Good spot, updated it accordingly.

```yaml
spec:
  trustStore:
    tls:
        secretRef:
        configMapRef:
```

The trust store can be expanded by either setting `spec.trustStore.tls.secretRef`
or `spec.trustStore.tls.configMapRef`, not both. Either option should contain the
data under a `caFile` key.

CA bundles configured this way will be aggregated with the ones defined at both
system and controller levels.

### Enabling Object-Level Trust Store

Object-level trust store expansion is disabled by default. To enable it start

> the controller with:

Reviewer 3: I would love to see this expanded a little to provide reasoning for this default setting. With the current Flux version 0.37 the trust store can always be expanded for objects such as HelmRepositories or GitRepositories by defining a `caFile` field in the referenced Secret. Given many admins will unlikely deviate from the defaults, users would no longer be able to do that. Please correct me if I'm wrong here.

Author: This is certainly a point up for debate. The security invariant here was "Flux should only connect to trusted servers" and the criteria used was that most users would expect Flux to be secure by default.

> Given many admins will unlikely deviate from the defaults

This is exactly the point. If something works, users won't look up the documentation and try understand the impact of security sensitive settings. Hence why ideally we should always prioritise security by design and by default.

The idea is that, by pre-populating the controller level SSH trust store with the top SaaS Git providers, a considerable amount of users would not have to worry about this. It will simply securely work - just like for TLS.
Then enterprise customers should configure this once, at controller level and be done with it, for both single and multi-tenancy. The only use case I see for Object-level trust stores to be used **in production**, would be in a Namespace as a Service multi-tenancy model, which would further weaken an already fragile security posture.

a `ConfigMap` or `Secret` directly into the Flux Controllers.

`ConfigMap` example:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: flux-trust-store
  namespace: flux-system
data:
  known_hosts: |
    github.com ecdsa-sha2-nistp256 AAAAE2VjZHNhLXNoYTItbmlzdHAyNTYAAAAIbmlzdHAyNTYAAABBBEmKSENjQEezOmxkZMy7opKgwFB9nkt5YRrYMjNuG5N87uRgg6CLrbo5wAdT/y6v0mKV0U2w0WZ2YB/++Tpockg=
```

Patch required on the main `kustomization.yaml`:
```yaml
  - patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/volumeMounts
        value:
          - name: ssh-trust-store
            mountPath: /etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts
            subPath: known_hosts
            readOnly: true
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/volumes
        value:
          - name: ssh-trust-store
            configMap:
              name: flux-trust-store
    target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: "(kustomize|image-automation|source|image-reflector|helm|notification)-controller"
```

#### Object-level Known Hosts Expansion

A new field is to be introduced into the existing kinds `ImageUpdateAutomation` and
`GitRepository`, to allow users to expand on the controller-level known hosts for

> SSH operations:

Reviewer 2: I find this very problematic, why would we allow for a namespaced object own by a tenant to alter the trust store for all tenants? This also makes Flux bootstrap break, since you can't control which CR is reconciled first, if people add a trust store in one CR we can't reconcile that first to make it available to others.

Author: It does, it expands the trust store for that object only.

Reviewer 2: How does this cope with the know_hosts from the `secretRef`? Can you explain the differences in the doc please?

Author: I will rephrase to make that clearer. But basically that's what we already do at present based on the CA bundles provided by secrets, however this would be based on a field instead.
